Otel tracing demo (#214)
kyma-project/examples: trace-demo/README.md

# Install OpenTelemetry Demo Application in Kyma

## Overview

> These instructions will install the OpenTelemetry [demo application](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo) on a Kyma cluster using this [helm chart](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-helm-charts/tree/main/charts/opentelemetry-demo).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following instructions install the OpenTelemetry [demo application](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo) on a Kyma cluster using a provided [Helm chart](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-helm-charts/tree/main/charts/opentelemetry-demo).
```

> **CAUTION:** This instructions are under development and are relying on a prelimary state of the [Configurable Tracing](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/issues/11231) story. The goal is to have early with an E2E scenario for that feature. The instructions for now require to reconfigure the Istio and telemetry installation which is only possible using a custom Kyma OpenSource installation. In the final state, this reconfiguration will not be required anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**CAUTION:** The following instructions are under development and rely on a preliminary state of the [Configurable Tracing](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/issues/11231) feature. The goal is to have an early E2E scenario for that feature. For now, you must reconfigure the Istio and Telemetry installation, which is only possible using a custom Kyma OpenSource installation. In the final state, this reconfiguration will not be required anymore.
```

## Prerequisites

- Kyma OSS installed from main branch (`kyma deploy -s main`)

> - kubectl > 1.22.x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- kubectl version 1.22.x or higher
```

- Helm 3.x

### Preparation

1. Export your Namespace as a variable. Replace the `{namespace}` placeholder in the following command and run it:

    ```bash
    export KYMA_NS="{namespace}"
    ```

> 1. If you don't have it created yet, now is the time to do so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If you don't have created a Namespace yet, do it now:
```

Does this really happen AFTER exporting the Namespace as a variable? Or before?

Reviewer 2: Yes you can save the name to a variable first, it's a bit more convenient because you will use the same namespace name from the beginning and less errors can be made

    ```bash
    kubectl create namespace $KYMA_NS
    ```

> 1. Assure that your namespace has istio-injection enabled by having the proper label in place

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To enable Istio injection in your Namespace, set the following label:
```

    ```bash
    kubectl label namespace $KYMA_NS istio-injection=enabled
    ```

1. Export the Helm release name that you want to use. The release name must be unique for the chosen Namespace. Be aware that all resources in the cluster will be prefixed with that name. Replace the `{release-name}` placeholder in the following command and run it:
    ```bash
    export HELM_RELEASE="{release-name}"
    ```

1. Update your Helm installation with the required Helm repository:

    ```bash
    helm repo add open-telemetry https://open-telemetry.github.io/opentelemetry-helm-charts
    helm repo update
    ```

> ### Activate Kyma Tracing Preview feature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Activate Kyma Tracing preview
```

> 1. (Temporary) Enable tracing feature in operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. (Temporary) In the Telemetry operator, enable the tracing feature:
```

    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/kyma/main/components/telemetry-operator/config/crd/bases/telemetry.kyma-project.io_tracepipelines.yaml
    kyma deploy -s main --component telemetry --value telemetry.operator.controllers.tracing.enabled=true
    ```

> 1. (Temporary) Activate Istio tracing based on w3c-tracecontext and OTLP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. (Temporary) Activate Istio tracing based on w3c-tracecontext and OTLP:
```

    ```bash
    kyma deploy -s main --component istio -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/trace-demo/istio-values.yaml
    ```

>     Potentially, you need to restart the relevant workloads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 1. If necessary, restart the relevant workloads.
```

> 1. Enable Jaeger backend by creating a new TracePipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To enable the Jaeger backend, create a new TracePipeline:
```

   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f tracepipeline.yaml
   ```

### Install the application

Run the Helm upgrade command, which installs the chart if not present yet.
```bash

> helm upgrade --version 0.9.6 --install --create-namespace -n $KYMA_NS $HELM_RELEASE open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo -f values.yaml

Author: ```suggestion
helm upgrade --version 0.9.6 --install --create-namespace -n $KYMA_NS $HELM_RELEASE open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/trace-demo/values.yaml
```

```

> You can either use the [`values.yaml`](./values.yaml) provided in this `trace-demo` folder, which contains customized settings deviating from the default settings, or create your own `values.yaml` file.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we offer both versions of the command to copy? One with URL to our values.yaml and one for local custom values?

Author: I think the local case is rare, I will just switch to the remote values.yaml
If you prefer we also can remove the sentence

### Verify the application

> 

Reviewer: This entire section might be easier to read as a table, like this:

```suggestion
To verify that the application is running properly, set up port forwarding:

| Check                                           | Command                                                                      | Port to call              |
|-------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Check the frontend                              | `kubectl -n $KYMA_NS port-forward svc/$HELM_RELEASE-frontend 8080`           | `http://localhost: 8080 ` |
| Verify that traces arrive in the Jaeger backend | `kubectl -n kyma-system port-forward svc/tracing-jaeger-query 16686`         | `http://localhost: 16686` |
| Enable failures with the feature flag service   | `kubectl -n $KYMA_NS port-forward svc/$HELM_RELEASE-featureflagservice 8081` | `http://localhost: 8081`  |
| Generate load with the load generator           | `kubectl -n $KYMA_NS port-forward svc/$HELM_RELEASE-loadgenerator 8089`      | `http://localhost: 8089`  |
```

> 1. Browse in the frontend by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To browse in the frontend, run:
```

   ```bash
   kubectl -n $KYMA_NS port-forward svc/$HELM_RELEASE-frontend 8080
   ````

>    and calling `http://localhost:8080`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Then, call `http://localhost:8080`.
```

1. Verify that traces arrive in the Jaeger backend:
   ```bash
   kubectl -n kyma-system port-forward svc/tracing-jaeger-query 16686
   ````

>    and calling `http://localhost:16686`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Then, call `http://localhost:16686`.
```

> 1. Enable failures via the feature flag service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Enable failures with the feature flag service:
```

   ```bash
   kubectl -n $KYMA_NS port-forward svc/$HELM_RELEASE-featureflagservice 8081
   ````

>    and calling `http://localhost:8081`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Then, call `http://localhost:8081`.
```

> 1. Generate load via the load generator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Generate load with the load generator:
```

   ```bash
   kubectl -n $KYMA_NS port-forward svc/$HELM_RELEASE-loadgenerator 8089
   ````

>    and calling `http://localhost:8089`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Then, call `http://localhost:8089`.
```
